EMAILC-62: Email Connector - Troubleshooting guide (#1437)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: email/1.4/modules/ROOT/pages/email-troubleshooting.adoc

. Click the project name in *Package Explorer* and then click *Run* > *Run As* > *Mule Application*.
. Navigate to the *Console* view to read the Email Connector's messages in the logger:
+
[source,plain-text]
----
DEBUG 2021-04-26 18:51:08,536 [_pollingSource_imapattachmentFlow/executor.01] [processor: ; event: ] org.mule.extension.email.internal.mailbox.BaseMailboxPollingSource: Poll will be skipped, since last poll emails are still being processed
INFO  2021-04-26 18:51:09,166 [[MuleRuntime].uber.04: [imapattachment].imapattachmentFlow.CPU_LITE @111719e0] [processor: imapattachmentFlow/processors/1/processors/2; event: 820f7fe0-a6d9-11eb-a84b-147dda4dba09] org.mule.runtime.core.internal.processor.LoggerMessageProcessor: "" as Binary {base: "64"}
DEBUG 2021-04-26 18:51:15,360 [_pollingSource_imapattachmentFlow/executor.01] [processor: ; event: ] org.mule.extension.email.internal.mailbox.BaseMailboxPollingSource: Email [172] was not processed.
....
----

== Troubleshoot SMTPS and Gmail Connection Issues

The method that you use to troubleshoot SMTPS connection issues depends on whether or not your Gmail account uses two-factor authentication:

=== Two-Factor Authentication

> If your account uses two-factor authentication value generate an app-specific password and use that instead of your normal password.

Reviewer: If your account uses a two-factor authentication value,...
or
If your account uses two-factor authentication, generate...

= Troubleshoot Email Connector - Mule 4

To troubleshoot Anypoint Connector for Email (Email Connector), become familiar with the information about app logs, JavaMail debugging, troubleshooting access attachments, troubleshooting protocols issues, and interpreting commonly thrown messages.

== View the App Log

If you encounter problems while running your Mule runtime engine (Mule) app, view the app log as follows:

* If you’re running the app from Anypoint Platform, the output is visible in the Anypoint Studio console window.
* If you’re running the app using Mule from the command line, the app log is visible in your OS console.

Unless the log file path is customized in the app’s log file `log4j2.xml`, view the app log in the default location `MULE_HOME/logs/<app-name>.log`.

== Enable JavaMail Debug Logging

> You can enable JavaMail debugging logging which is used by the underlying third-party classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JavaMail debugging logging is used by underlying third-party classes.
```
I suggest omitting the first part of the orig. sentence because it is already in the title and in the following task intro.
Will your audience understand what "underlying third-party classes" are?

To enable JavaMail debugging logging:

. Access Anypoint Studio and navigate to the *Package Explorer* view.
. Open your application's project name.
. Open the `src/main/mule` path folder.
. Open your Mule app XML file inside the folder.

> . Add the `<property key="mail.debug" value="true"/>` on the IMAP or SMTP connection element.

Reviewer 2: add to:
```suggestion
. Add the `<property key="mail.debug" value="true"/>` to the IMAP or SMTP connection element.
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
  <email:imaps-connection host="..." user="..." password="..." >
    <email:properties >
      <email:property key="mail.debug" value="true" />
    </email:properties>
  </email:imaps-connection>
----
+
[start=6]
. Save your changes.
. Click the project name in *Package Explorer* and then click *Run* > *Run As* > *Mule Application*.

> . Navigate to the *Console* view to read the Email messages in the logger:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Navigate to the *Console* view to read the email messages in the logger:
```

+
[source,plain-text]
----
DEBUG: JavaMail version 1.6.3
DEBUG: successfully loaded resource: /META-INF/javamail.default.address.map
DEBUG: getProvider() returning javax.mail.Provider[STORE,imap,com.sun.mail.imap.IMAPStore,Oracle]
DEBUG IMAP: mail.imap.fetchsize: 16384
DEBUG IMAP: mail.imap.ignorebodystructuresize: false
DEBUG IMAP: trying to connect to host "******", port 993, isSSL true
* OK The Microsoft Exchange IMAP4 service is ready. [******]
A0 CAPABILITY
* CAPABILITY IMAP4 IMAP4rev1 AUTH=PLAIN AUTH=XOAUTH2 SASL-IR UIDPLUS MOVE ID UNSELECT CHILDREN IDLE NAMESPACE LITERAL+
A0 OK CAPABILITY completed.
...
----

If you run the app in Anypoint Studio, the logging prints the debug lines in the console view. +

> If you run the app in a standalone Mule, the logging prints the debug lines in the log file.

Reviewer 2: "the logging" or "the logger"?

== Enable Email Connector Debug Logging

> To begin troubleshooting Email Connector, enable debug logging to see the exact error messages and its trace:

Reviewer 2: To what does "its" in "its trace" refer?
If the connector, clarify; if the "error messages," then there is numerical disagreement between "messages" (plural) and "its trace" (singular).

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<AsyncLogger name="org.mule.extension.email" level="DEBUG" />
----
+
[start=6]
. Save your changes.
. Click the project name in *Package Explorer* and then click *Run* > *Run As* > *Mule Application*.
. Navigate to the *Console* view to read the Email Connector's messages in the logger:
+
[source,plain-text]
----
DEBUG 2021-04-26 18:51:08,536 [_pollingSource_imapattachmentFlow/executor.01] [processor: ; event: ] org.mule.extension.email.internal.mailbox.BaseMailboxPollingSource: Poll will be skipped, since last poll emails are still being processed
INFO  2021-04-26 18:51:09,166 [[MuleRuntime].uber.04: [imapattachment].imapattachmentFlow.CPU_LITE @111719e0] [processor: imapattachmentFlow/processors/1/processors/2; event: 820f7fe0-a6d9-11eb-a84b-147dda4dba09] org.mule.runtime.core.internal.processor.LoggerMessageProcessor: "" as Binary {base: "64"}
DEBUG 2021-04-26 18:51:15,360 [_pollingSource_imapattachmentFlow/executor.01] [processor: ; event: ] org.mule.extension.email.internal.mailbox.BaseMailboxPollingSource: Email [172] was not processed.
....
----

== Troubleshoot SMTPS and Gmail Connection Issues

> The method that you use to troubleshoot SMTPS connection issues depends on whether or not your Gmail account uses two-factor authentication:

Reviewer 2: "...on whether your Gmail account uses either two-factor authentication or password-based authentication:"?

=== Two-Factor Authentication

> If your account uses two-factor authentication value generate an app-specific password and use that instead of your normal password.

Reviewer 2: Please reread and reword to clarify what you really mean. My best guess:
```suggestion
If your account uses two-factor authentication to generate an app-specific password, use that instead of your normal password.
```

See https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/185833[Sign in Using App Password] for details. You do not need to enable *Less Secure Apps* in your Gmail account.

> === Password Based Authentication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Password-Based Authentication
```

If your Gmail account does not use two-factor authentication, set up and enable *Less Secure Apps* in your Gmail account, and if your password does not work, go to https://accounts.google.com/b/0/DisplayUnlockCaptcha[Allow Access to Your Google Account] and follow these steps:

. Enter your username and password.
. Enter the letters on the captcha screen.
. Return to your Mule app and rerun the flow.

== Understand the Behavior of the Different Protocols

> If your problem is about the behavior of each protocol, check the RFC documents. A Request for Comments (RFC) is a publication from the Internet Society (ISOC) and its associated bodies, most prominently the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the principal technical development and standards-setting bodies for the Internet. The IETF adopts some of the proposals published as RFCs as Internet Standards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your problem is protocol behavior, check the RFC documents. A Request for Comments (RFC) is a publication from the Internet Society (ISOC) and its associated bodies, most prominently the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the principal technical development and standards-setting bodies for the internet. The IETF adopts some of the proposals published as RFCs as internet standards.
```

Some documents that you can check are:

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5322[RFC-5322 - Internet Message Format]
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1064[RFC-1064 - IMAP2 - INTERACTIVE MAIL ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION 2]
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1939[RFC-1939 - POP3 - Post Office Protocol - Version 3]
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5321[RFC-5321 - SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol]
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2045[RFC-2045 - MIME - Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies]

== Understand Common Throws

> Here is a list of common throw messages and how to interpret them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a list of common throw messages and how to interpret them:
```

> * EMAIL:EMAIL_NOT_FOUND
> 
>   The email with the emailId provided can not be found in a mailbox folder.

Reviewer 2: If you like, you can use the following format for each of the messages:
```suggestion
* EMAIL:EMAIL_NOT_FOUND: The email identified by `emailId` cannot be found in a mailbox folder.
```
If you do not mean to refer to a syntax element, remember that ID is always allcaps and separate: email ID.

* EMAIL:ACCESSING_FOLDER

  There was a problem accessing an email folder or the folder does not exist.

* EMAIL:CONNECTIVITY

  A connection could not be established.

* EMAIL:RETRY_EXHAUSTED

>   A problem occurred when routing a message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  A problem occurred during message routing.
```

* EMAIL:EMAIL_LIST

>   An error occurred trying to list emails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  An error occurred during an attempt to list emails.
```

Reviewer 2: GLOBALLY reword the following throw descriptions so that they do not sound like the error or exception was the subject "routing" or "trying" or "parsing" or so on. Please let me know if you don't understand this.

* EMAIL:SEND

>   An exception occurred trying to send an email.

Reviewer 2: during an attempt to

* EMAIL:FETCHING_ATTRIBUTES

>   An error occurred while parsing attributes from an email.

Reviewer 2: during email attribute parsing

* EMAIL:MARK

>   An error occurred while marking email flags.

Reviewer 2: during email flag marking

* EMAIL:EXPUNGE_ERROR

>   A error occurred while deleting emails from a folder.

Reviewer 2: during an attempt to delete

* EMAIL:ATTACHMENT

>   An error occurred while sending an attachment.

Reviewer 2: during an attempt to send

* EMAIL:READ_EMAIL

>   An error while reading the email content.

Reviewer 2: during an attempt to read email content

* EMAIL:AUTHENTICATION

>   Indicates that there was an authentication failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Authentication failed.
```

* EMAIL:INVALID_CREDENTIALS

>   An error occurred to check the consistency of the username and password parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  An error occurred during the username and password parameter consistency check.
```

* EMAIL:UNKNOWN_HOST

>   The IP address of a host can not be determined or port out of range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The IP address of a host cannot be determined or a port is out of range.
```

* EMAIL:CONNECTION_TIMEOUT

  The server took too long to reply to a data request.

* EMAIL:DISCONNECTED

>   An error occurred while connecting to the store or the connection was interrupted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  An error occurred during store connection, or the connection was interrupted.
```

* EMAIL:SSL_ERROR

>   An error occurred while creating SSL context or the TLS context wasn't properly configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  An error occurred during SSL context creation, or the TLS context wasn't properly configured.
```
